copyright@vinibhati
EDITORIAL WORKSHOP - SESSION 1
LEVELS OF EDITING
❖
Developmental Editing
❖
Copyediting
➢
Line-editing
➢
Fact-checking
❖
Proofreading
❖
Spot-Checking
❖
Beta-reading
● Developmental Editing/ Substantive Editing
Involves detailed feedback and collaboration with the author on macro level
issues in the manuscript. Focus on big-picture factors like plot coherence,
compelling character arcs, powerful climax, chapter wise transitions and
thematic considerations.
● Factors to keep in mind during developmental editing
○ What is the thematic statement of the story?
■ Thematic statement the “central” or “controlling story
idea,” the idea that guides you in writing your entire novel.
It shapes the strategic choices you make as you write.
■ If used skillfully, a thematic statement will make the story
feel deeper, and touch readers on an emotional level. It may
even change how they view the world and how they behave.
○ Are the characters and settings complementing the genre of the
book?
○ Are the sequence of events in the story logically coherent?
○ Does the actions of the characters align with their personality?
○ Is the conflict and resolution compelling enough?
○ Does the story have a balance of description and character
conversations?
○ Are the transitions between chapters and scenes smooth or
abrupt?
● Copy-editing and Line editing

copyright@vinibhati
Involves a closer look at the manuscript to ensure that the writing is more
engaging and reader-friendly. We need to improve the clarity, coherency,
consistency, and correctness of the language and address word-repetition.
Broadly, we need to engage with the technicalities here and fix mechanical
issues.
Fact-Checking is an intrinsic part of copy-editing. Since the editor is working
on a simpler software, it is easier to rectify factual errors. For fiction, fact-
checking will involve checking word usage and their meanings, idioms and
spellings.
● Factors to keep in mind while copy-editing
○ Spellings and typos
○ Grammatical inconsistencies
○ Capitalization issues.
○ Avoid repetition of words
○ Usage of numbers or numerals
○ Tense inconsistencies
○ Character names inconsistencies
● Proofreading
In this stage, the editor needs to take the reader’s perspective in mind. The
editor will primarily be working on the designed file so you should keep an eye
out on stylistic issues which can visually enhance the reading experience.
● Factors to keep in mind while proofreading:
○ Inconsistencies in layout and typography;
○ Punctuation errors and the overuse of commas and semicolon
○ Confusing page and word breaks;
○ Incorrect captioning on any illustrations and page numbers in the
contents.
○ Spacing issues between words and lines
○ Bold and Italics convention
■ Anything that looks visually awkward needs to be flagged.
○ Lingering typos and technical errors.
● Coordination with the typesetter
○ A proofreader is supposed to communicate with the typesetter as
you will be editing the designed layout. A typesetter designs the

copyright@vinibhati
book so he/she is majorly technical in their approach. The
instructions have to be short, clear and crisp. It should be phrased
as a command and not as a suggestion.
■ Incorrect Instruction: The word can be in italics
■ Correct Instruction: Change the word in italics
● TOOLS IN ADOBE PDF
● Spot-Checking
○ To be Conducted by Chief Editor/ Editor in Chief
● Beta-reading
○ The manuscript is shared with our target audience a.k.a a potential
reader.
THE THREE C’s- MANTRA OF EFFECTIVE EDITING
❖
CONSISTENCY
➢
The tone, character spellings, bold/italics formatting, spelling
convention (US/UK English usage) have to be consistent everywhere.
❖
CONCISE WRITING
➢
Avoid long-winding and convoluted construction. Make the writing
simple and elegant.
❖
CLARITY OF MEANING
➢
Weed out phrases and sentences which are vague and do not add
anything to the plot or character evolution.

copyright@vinibhati
EDITING STYLESHEET
● ORTHOGRAPHY
○ Ideally follow British orthography, albeit with ‘z’ in words like civilize,
organize, etc. But if you are following American orthography in some
cases, that works too. Keep the orthography consistent throughout the
book.
● NUMBER:
○ From one to hundred, these should be in words, and thereafter in
numerals.
○ Years and dates are always in numeral, as in 15 January 1999 (the date
precedes the month; no comma after the month); similarly for a date
without the year, e.g. 1 March.
○ For fractions that are spelt out, print three-quarters/ two-thirds.
○ Use the symbol % for a percentage; no space between numeral and
symbol – 35%; in humanistic copy, the word percent should be used (one
word)
○ No apostrophe between the year and the ‘s’: 1990s.
○ A single open close quote to highlight dates written thus: 90s’
CAPITALS
● Designations are capitalised when the designation is used as a prefix to the
name. E.g. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, but in lower case otherwise, as in
the Indian prime minister. Similarly, for ministries and organisations, capitals
are used when the full title is used, as in Ministry of Education, but not when it
is education ministry.
● Specific terms like the Indian Army, Indian Air Force or Indian Navy are
capitalised, but the words army, navy, etc., are lower case when standing alone
or not part of an official title.
● Partition is capitalised when referring to it as a noun, as in at the time of
Partition; but not when used as a verb, as in the partition of India. Likewise
with ‘independence’.
● The Second World War, First World War, etc., would be capitalised.

copyright@vinibhati
● a.m. (ante meridiem), p.m. (post meridiem), should be in lower case, except in
lines of capitals or small capitals.
● Acronyms should always be explained in brackets in the first instance, as in All
India Radio (AIR), and only the acronym used in subsequent references.
FULL POINT
● Use periods in the case of initials, as in J.P. Singh.
● Abbreviations and contractions consisting of upper and lower cases take full
points as in Mt. (Mount) St. (Saint) Ph.D (Doctor ‘of Philosophy), exceptions to
be made for Rs, Dr (Doctor) Revd (Reverend: not Rev), Mr, Mrs, Mme, Mlle
(Mademoiselle), Prof, Col - here full points are not required.
ITALICS
● Common/generic Indian words – masala, dhoti, kurta, salaam, ghazal, bhangra,
bharatnatyam, kathak, ji, dada, mama, chacha – may be excluded from
italicisation.
● For uncommon non-English words, italicise in the first instance only to
designate it as a non-English word, but keep in roman henceforth.
● Use of italics should be kept to the minimum. Names of books and journals
must be italicised (not in quotes) but not the titles of articles, poems, Ph.D
theses and unpublished material.
● Titles of plays, films and TV serials should be in italics.
● etc. is always in roman typeface with a full point.
● et al. is always in italics. Other non-English words, as in French, Latin etc. will
be italicised.
● Names of specific ships, aircrafts, etc., are italicised, but not abbreviations
preceding them, e.g. HMS Mayflower.

copyright@vinibhati
CONNECTING PHRASES
● In works of fiction, keep the use of conjunctions like ‘and’, ‘but’, ‘thus’, ‘hence’,
‘since’, etc., to the minimum. Wherever possible, make the sentence complete
without using these terms, or else join by N- dashes, or break the sentence.
● However, it may be the author’s style to use conjunctions, in which case
coordinate and work out a style with the author.
● In some cases, however, two or more commas are necessary:
○ The French, having occupied Portugal, began to advance into Spain.
○ Be assured, then, that order, frugality, and economy are the necessary
supporters of every personal and private virtue.
DIALOGUE WRITING PUNCTUATION RULES
I
● Comma before the opening quotation mark.
● Capital letter to indicate the beginning of a sentence inside the opening
quotation mark.
● Period to end the quoted sentence.
● Closing quotation mark.
○ Example: Mary said, “Call me tomorrow.”
○ “Call me tomorrow,” Mary said.
II
● Capital letter to indicate the beginning of a sentence inside the opening
quotation mark.
● A comma to end the quoted sentence before the closing quotation mark that
precedes the dialogue tag.
● Dialogue tag at the end with a period to end the sentence.
○ Example: “Call me,” Mary said, “tomorrow.”
III
● If some expression does not hint at the dialogue having been said out loud, it
need not be preceded or followed by a comma.
○ “I knew you won’t be able to make it.” He smirked/ smiled/ laughed/
clicked his fingers/ turned around/ cheered.

copyright@vinibhati
IV
● If a character is quoting someone else in their speech, you need to place this
within quote marks as well. But to prevent confusion, you should use the
opposite kind of quote marks as you use for the main quotation.
○ For instance, if we were using single quotation marks for our main
quote, we would use double quote marks for the quote-within-a-quote:
○ ‘He called me an “arrogant fool” when I said I’d seen bigger horses.’
○ Here, we use double quote marks around ‘arrogant fool’. This shows that
the speaker is quoting someone else within their dialogue.
V
● A good guideline when formatting dialogue is ‘new speaker, new paragraph’.
This means that when someone new starts speaking, you set the dialogue on a
new line.
○ For instance: Craig stared at the massive horse. ‘So huge,’ he muttered
to himself.
‘What are you doing?’ asked Shannon, emerging from the farmhouse.
‘I’m watching this massive horse,’ Craig said.
‘Well, I can see that,’ Shannon said. ‘But you’ve been here for six hours,
Craig.’
VI
● One passage of dialogue may require multiple paragraphs.
○ For instance, a character may be telling another character a story within
a story as part of your narrative, which could involve speaking at length.
○ Use a quotation mark at the start of each paragraph when formatting
dialogue. However, you will only use a closing quotation mark when the
character finally finishes speaking.
○ Example: Craig sighed. ‘I’ve always been obsessed with horses,’ he
explained. ‘When I was a child, I spent weekends on my grandparents’
farm. But all they had were miniature ponies. And they told me that all

copyright@vinibhati
horses were the same size. They said the ones I saw on television looked
bigger because they hired tiny actors to ride them. And I believed it.
‘Or, I did until I was eighteen, anyway. That’s when I met Clayton
Moore, the guy who played the Lone Ranger on TV. And he was over six
feet tall, so I knew that Silver couldn’t have been as small as the ponies
on my grandparents’ farm! It had all been a lie! I felt so betrayed. And
ever since then, I have been looking for the biggest horse I can find.’
VII
● Use ellipses to show that speech has trailed off.
○ Example: ‘I don’t know why you have a problem with…’ Craig said, before
falling into silence.
VIII
● Use capitalization to indicate the end of the sentence.
○ When writing dialogue, only capitalize the first letter of a word to
indicate the end of the sentence.
■ When using quotations, though, capitalization in mid-sentence is
common. More specifically, when quotations form complete
sentences, they must be capitalized no matter where they appear
in the main sentence. All of the sentences below are correct, for
example:
Matthew said, “In that case, I’m going out for a walk!”
“We are not amused.” – Queen Victoria
Neil Young’s admonishment “It’s better to burn out than it is to
rust” is not appreciated by everyone.
○ There may be times when you end the quote with punctuation that would
normally require the next word to be capitalized, such as an exclamation
point or question mark. But unless the sentence is truly over, use a
lowercase letter to follow this punctuation.

copyright@vinibhati
○ Example: "He's here! He's here!" she screamed.
"Would you like to answer the door?" she asked.
"What do you mean," he said to Jenna, "by asking me to dinner?"