Note: please key in your updates in red.
PENGUIN RANDOM HOUSE INDIA STYLE GUIDE
Additional style guide elements to keep in mind:
• jugdment without e for cases
• judgement with e for other instances
• Adjectives positioning
• Opinion or quality of noun> size>age> shape>color>origin or material>a
qualifier. But before stating adjectives of quality the adjectives of quantity
or numeral adjectives must be there. All these are used as per the
availability and need of the description of a noun in a sentence.
• Adjectives arrangement:
• opinion-size-age-shape-colour-origin-material-purpose noun
• him and me
• he and I
• us and me
• we and I
• Citing Penguin in footnotes:
- Pre-2013 (merger): Penguin Books India, New Delhi
- 2014 onwards: PRHI, Gurgaon
• North-east, North-eastern states, north-eastern direction
• The Economist, The Times, The Hindu: only these three instances will the
The be capitalized and italicized
• Wire, Firstpost, Livemint, ThePrint, Quint: all in roman
• India Today, Week, DNA: in itals

• Indian Subcontinent (7 countries): India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka,
Nepal, Bhutan and the Maldives.
• To find acronyms in Word: <[A-Z]{2,}> (in Wildcard mode)
• To find straight apostrophes in Word, you’d type: ^39
• You use ^34 to find straight double quotes
• Italics (of vernacular, local words and those not found in the OED) on the
first appearance only
• Food items, names of trees etc. are not italicized
• How songs are treated: ‘The Continental’, ‘Night and Day’, ‘Norwegian
Wood’
• NUMBER RANGES ARE DENOTED BY EN DASHES, NOT
HYPHENS
Guide to capitalizing headlines:
Capitalize
Don’t capitalize
Prepositions in, on, like, at, of, by, for, into, with, from, between, beyond,
about, than, without, against
Articles a, an, the
Conjunctions and, but, if, or, than, yet
Pronoun it, this, these, those, that, what, her, who, his, us, oneself, any
Verb is, was, be, am, are, were, being, been, should

Determiner its, his, any, my
Adverb as, up, not
GLOBALS:
Check for double spaces, double quotes, space before a comma, space before a
full stop, space before a quotation mark, spaces before en dash, em dash and
hyphens
Check for British spellings; look out for:
- ise (lise, nise, tise, sise, vise, mise, gise, rise, dise)
- isa (lisa, nisa, tisa, misa, risa)
- isi (tisi, gisi, nisi, sisi, misi, visi, risi)
- thise (sympathize)
- yse, yze
- or (lor, vor, bor, nor)
- our, tt, ll, tre, ter, nce, nse, tice, tise, cuss
- Space before every footnote begins
- Dots between initials
- 2016 —
- Period dots before FNs
- zero to
- numbers

- sub-
- lakh not lakhs
- crore not crores
Curly quotes not copy-pasted ones (')
For example, to find straight apostrophes in Word, you'd type: ^39
You use ^34 to find straight double quotes.
Check ellipsis (there should be one space between each dot)
Check double dots
Check double quotes (we only use single quotes to begin with, and double
quotes for a quote within a quote)
per cent, NOT % or percent
Mr, Mrs, Ms, Dr, the Internet, YouTube, WhatsApp: correct spellings
… . . .
.’

.”
-
Abbreviations
• An abbreviation that is a contraction, i.e. that retains its first and last letters,
should appear without a stop, e.g. Mr, Ms, Mrs, Dr, St (for street and Saint).
• But an abbreviation that does not retain its original last letter must appear
with a stop, e.g. Prof., Maj., Capt.
• For abbreviated names, there are stops but no spaces between initials, but a
space after, e.g. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam.
• There are stops in etc., e.g., i.e.
• There are no stops in measurements, e.g. 7 cm, 11 kg
• There are stops after abbreviated names of parts of a book, e.g. vol. 5(Or v.
5), no. 3, sec. 11, p. 92.
• Do not use abbreviations like lit. crit for literary criticism.
• Do not use & in place of and except in an abbreviation. Thus, Jammu and
Kashmir not Jammu & Kashmir, but J & K, not J and K.
• Educational degrees like BA, MA, MBBS, BTech, MPhil and PhD are used
abbreviated but with no stops.
• There are no stops in abbreviated names of states like UP, MP, HP, WB.
• It is fine to use commonly understood abbreviations like USA and UK or TV
(not tv) and CD (not cd).
• But abbreviations like CBI or NASA should be spelt out on first appearance
and abbreviated thereafter.
• Party names like BJP, VHP, CPI and AIADMK should be spelt out on first
appearance.
• Organizational or institutional names like DRDO, PMO, SAIL, TELCO etc.
should be spelt out on first appearance.
• For PM, CM, MP, MLA etc. the full form should be used where the use is
sparing.

Bias, Libel, Parochialism
• Bias (typically gender bias or sectarian bias) is easy to spot and rectify.
Evaluative judgements made on the basis of a person’s gender and about the
class/caste/regional identity of an individual or group should always be
interrogated. Gender neutrality in particular must be striven for in a culture
that is still coded in patriarchy. A country, ship or nature should be referred
to as ‘it’, not ‘she’.
• Parochialism is sometimes more difficult to identify because it tends to
perpetuate clichés arising from an insular, narrow-minded view of
proceedings. Parochialism based on class, religion and regional identity
should be watched out for, in particular.
• Libel constitutes of a questionable or legally objectionable statement tending
to discredit a person or persons that the publisher can be sued for. These
should be carefully identified and cleared with a lawyer before publication.
Capitalization
Capitals should be used sparingly, but the following instances demand them:
• Titular heads like the President (of a country). However, say the president of
an organization. Note that chief justice, chief minister and prime minister
should either be all lower case or all upper case. Secretary (as a government
official) is upper case while minister is lower case. Example, the President
of the United States v/s the president of a local organization.
• Also, the Speaker, the Governor, the Parliament, the Supreme Court, a
specific high court (e.g. ‘Patna High Court’, but ‘the high court’), the Lok
Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. For MLAs and MPs, the full forms are members
of Parliament and members of the Legislative Assembly.
• Union as in the Union cabinet, the Union finance ministry. Centre as in the
Central government. The Constitution. Articles of the Constitution. Note that
ministries, governments and assemblies are lower case.
• The Opposition, as in ‘leader of the Opposition’.
• The Valley, when referring to Kashmir.
• God as in the Christian divinity. But ‘gods’ are lower case.
• Independence and Partition, when referring to the actual event that took
place in 1947.

• Community names like Muslim and Brahmin. But scheduled caste, adivasi.
Where identity is politicized it should be in caps, e.g. Harijans, Dalits.
• Trade names like Xerox, Boeing, Pepsi.
• Full names of organizations like the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research. Can subsequently be referred to as the council.
• Political persuasions like communism, fascism, socialism are lower case.
Marxism is capitalized.
• A geographical region is not capitalized. Thus, south India, east Bengal.
• When a designation is used as an adjective, it is capitalized. Thus, Defence
Minister George Fernandes. But, former defence minister Arun Singh.
Currencies and Calculations
• The units are thousands, lakh and crore for India, and million elsewhere. The
house style is Rs 5 lakh, and ‘Rs 5-lakh deficit’ (where the amount is used as
an adjective). There is no stop after Rs but there is a space between the
currency and the amount, e.g. Rs 450. For pound, sterling and dollars,
however, there is no space (£45, $70).
Dates
• The house style is 15 August 1947; 15 August; and August 1947, with no
commas separating the day, month and year.
Indian Words
• Commonly understood words from Hindi and other major Indian languages
should not be italicized; they should be integrated into the text and not made
to stand out.
• There can of course be some debate over what is a commonly understood
word, and to whom. If there is doubt about the meaning of a word, it should
always be explained in its context in the text.
• Sentences or part-sentences in a regional language should always be
italicized and the meaning given in parenthesis.
• Footnotes explaining the meaning of Indian words should be avoided at all
costs since they draw unnecessary attention to the ‘alienness’ of vernacular
words. Italicization on first appearance is equally unacceptable for the same
reasons. A glossary may be provided, if necessary, but it is better to try to

explain the meaning in the text itself. Alternately, notes (not footnotes) on
the text can be incorporated.
• An unnecessary pile-up of Indian words and expressions, especially where
these interfere with the meaning being understood, is to be avoided.
Italicization
• Words and phrases from foreign languages that are in common use in
English should not be italicized. Thus, nouveau riche, ad nauseam, etc.
should be Rom. Foreign words and phrases that are not commonly
understood should be avoided altogether.
• The name of a complete work, e.g. a book, a film, a newspaper, a television
show, a symphony, is italicized.
• The name of an article, essay etc., is not italicized but put within quotes.
Note: when italicizing the name of a periodical, do not italicize the initial
‘the’ even if it is part of the periodical’s printed title (e.g. the Times of
India).
• Oral epics like the Iliad, the Odyssey, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata
are Rom, as is the Bible.
Numbers
• 0 to 99 will be spelt out as zero to ninety-nine.
• Numbers beyond twenty will be hyphenated, e.g. ‘fifty-one’.
• Numbers from 100 onward will be written in figures.
• Figures beyond 10,000 will be separated by commas for every two digits,
e.g. 20,000, 1,20,000, 12,20,000.
• Sport scores are always in figures, e.g. 7 runs, 1 over, 15 points.
• Percentages are in figures, e.g. 82.3 per cent. (Per cent is two words. Do not
use %)
• Continuous numbers are in double digits. Thus, 9–11, 15–17, 29–33, 98–
101, 117–19, 125–32. Also, for dates, 1899–1947, 1911–14, 1947–84,
1999–2001, 2002–04, etc.
Punctuation
• Refer to the Penguin Guide to Punctuation.
• Briefly, commas are of four types:

o The listing/serial/Oxford comma is used in a list where and or or would be
possible instead. Example: I bought apples, oranges, and bananas.
o The joining comma is used before and, or, but, yet or while when they join
two complete sentences. Example: I wanted to go for a walk, but it started
raining.
o The gapping comma is used to show that words have been omitted instead
of repeated. Example: She likes hiking; he, swimming.
o A pair of bracketing commas is used to set off a weak interruption.
Example: My brother, who lives in London, is visiting us next week.
• Semi-colons should be used to distinguish disparate sections of a long
sentence.
• Em dashes (—) should be used to demarcate a parenthetical part of a
sentence or a digression from the main argument. There should be no spaces
before and after an em dash.
• En dashes (–) should be used not as substitutes for em dashes but only in
place of a hyphen when the two quantities separated are equal and/or
reciprocal, e.g. the 1914–18 war, the Mumbai–Pune road, the Nehru–
Gandhi family. For the year 1998–99 etc., use an en dash.
• An ellipsis of three separated points, with a space before and after ( . . . ) is
used to indicate breaks in speech or argument.
• For parentheses, a single bracket ( ) should be used. For parenthesis within
parenthesis, square brackets [ ] should be used.
Quotes
• The Penguin style for quotations is to use single quote (‘ ’) marks.
• For quotes within quotes, double quote marks (“ ”) are to be used.
• For quotes within quotes within quotes, single quote marks are to be used
again.
• Where a complete sentence is quoted, the closing quote mark should come
after the stop (.’). Where a phrase or a section of a sentence is quoted, the
closing quote mark should come before the stop (’.).
• Language should not be changed to Penguin specifications within quoted
sections.
• An ellipsis of three separated points with a space before and after ( . . . )
should be used to indicate breaks in quoted material.

• Quoted material longer than fifty words and poetry longer than two lines
should be set apart from the text (in smaller point size where necessary) and
indented one em on both sides.
• Permissions for quoted material longer than 100 words should be obtained
well in advance.
Time
• ce and bce: both are in small caps, with no stops separating the letters.
• a.m. and p.m.: always lower case, and with stops after both letters. It is
always better to say 6 a.m. or 6 p.m. than 6 o’clock, which is vague.
• Do not use the 24-hour clock, as in ‘1800 hours’ unless the context
specifically demands it.
• The hour and minutes in ‘6.45 p.m.’ should be separated by a stop and not a
colon.
SPELLING AND CORRECT USAGE
Ground Rules of Spelling
• ‘z’ rather than ‘s’ and ‘-ize’ rather than ‘-ise’. Thus, ‘organization’ not
‘organisation’; ‘standardize’ not ‘standardise’.
However, the following words must be spelt -ise, not -ize:
advertise franchise
apprise merchandise
braise premise
chastise prise
circumcise reprise
comprise revise
despise supervise

devise surmise
enterprise surprise
exercise televise
• Also, analyse, catalyse, paralyse etc. should be spelt -yse, not -yze.
• British rather than American spellings.
• Thus, -ae- rather than -e- in anaemia, archaeology etc.
-ce rather than -se in defence, offence, pretence etc.
em- and en- rather than im- and in- in embed, enclose etc.
-l- rather than -ll- in fulfil, instalment, skilful, wilful etc.
-ll- rather than -l- in marvellous, woollen etc.
-lled and -ller rather than -led and -ler in travelled, traveller etc.
-ou- rather than -o- in mould, honour, labour etc.
-oue- rather than -eu- in manoeuvre etc.
-que- rather than -ck- in cheque, chequered etc.
-re rather then -er in calibre, centre, litre, kilometre, sombre, theatre etc.
Troublesome Words
Affect/Effect Affect means to act upon or influence. To
effect is to produce or accomplish.
All right Not ‘alright’.
Along with Not ‘alongwith’.
Among/between Between emphasizes the individual, among
the group. Logically, between should be
used to indicate reciprocal relationships, and
among collective ones.
Any more Not ‘anymore’.
Any time Not ‘anytime’.
Anything, anywhere, anyway, anyone One word.

Appraise/Apprise Appraise means to evaluate, set a
price on. Apprise means to inform.
Benefited/Benefiting Not benefitted/benefitting.
Bi-monthly/-weekly Avoid using, since the meaning is
ambiguous.
Can, may, will, shall Can apply to what is possible; may
applies to what is permissible; will
expresses simple futurity; shall
expresses a sense of definitiveness
and determination.
Careen/career For a runaway vehicle, to careen is to
sway or tilt dangerously. Career refers
simply to uncontrolled movement.
Celibacy Refers to marital status, not to sexual
abstinence.
Centre on Not ‘centre around’, as common
parlance has it. You can circle around
something, but centering around
something is physically impossible.
Compare to/with Compare to is used to liken things,
compare with to consider their
similarities and differences.
Complacent/complaisant If you are complacent, you are
pleased with yourself. If you are
complaisant, you are eager to please
others.
Comprise Is not followed by of, unlike consist
and compose. The whole comprises
the parts.
Confidant Applies only to a man. A woman
would be a confidante.

Continual/continuous Continual refers to things that happen
repeatedly but not constantly;
continuous indicates an unbroken
sequence.
Country, nation Country refers to geographical
identity, nation to political and social
identity.
Dangling modifier Can cause much amusement, but
often goes undetected. Is typically
caused by an unattached present
participle. Example: ‘Handing me my
whisky, his face broke into a smile’,
which conjures up the image of a face
that can pass a whisky. Should be
rewritten as: ‘As he handed me my
whisky, his face broke into a smile.’
Data Is actually plural, but is generally
used as singular: no one says ‘datum’
any more. It is best to avoid
constructions like ‘The data
show/shows that . . . ’
Decimate Literal meaning: reduce by a tenth.
Should never be used to indicate
annihilation.
Defuse/diffuse To defuse is to quickly and
completely allay, as in defusing a
bomb. To diffuse is to distribute
evenly and therefore diminish.
Dependant/dependent Dependant is the noun, dependent the
adjective.
Deprecate/depreciate To depreciate is to decrease the
importance of something. To
deprecate is to disapprove strongly.
De rigueur Not ‘de rigeur’.

Different One thing is different from another;
not different to.
Dilemma, Hobson’s choice Both are often misused. To be in a
dilemma is to be faced with two
options, both of which are
unsatisfactory. A Hobson’s choice is
no choice at all.
Disinterested Is not the same as uninterested.
Disinterested means impartial,
unbiased.
Empathy/sympathy Empathy with; sympathy for.
Every day/Everyday Everyday is one word only when used
as an adjective, e.g. ‘everyday
occurrence’.
Farther/further Farther refers to literal (and therefore
measurable) distance, further to
figurative distance.
Fiancé A man whom one is engaged to. The
female version is fiancée.
Flaunt/Flout To flaunt is to show off. To flout is to
mock or insult.
Flounder/founder To founder is to sink. To flounder is
to flail about helplessly.
Forbear/forebear To forbear is to abstain. A forebear is
an ancestor.
Forever/for ever ‘For ever’ refers to a very long period
of time, ‘ever’ being the measurement
of that time. ‘Forever’ means always.
Forego/forgo To forego is to precede. To forgo is to
do without.

Fortuitous Means accidental. Has nothing to do
with ‘fortunate’.
Fulsome Does not mean lavish or wholesome
as is often supposed, but odious,
overfull.
Graffiti Is plural. The singular is graffito.
Homogenous/-geneous Homogenous means of common
ancestry. Homogeneous refers to
uniformity.
Hour, heir, honest, honour The only words starting with h where
the h is silent, and which need to be
preceded by an, rather than a.
Historian/historical and hotel should
be preceded by a, not an.
Inchoate Means nascent, incipient, not
disorganized.
Ingenious/Ingenuous Ingenious means skilful, clever.
Ingenuous means frank, free from
deception.
Insidious/invidious Insidious indicates the stealthy spread
of something undesirable. Invidious
means offensive.
In spite of Not ‘inspite of’.
Its/It’s The most common mistake still. ‘Its’
is the possessive form of ‘it’; ‘it’s’ is
an abbreviation for ‘it is’.
Just deserts Not ‘just desserts’. The phrase refers
to what one deserves, and has nothing
to do with food.
Leitmotif Not leitmotiv.
Licence/license Licence is the noun, license the verb.

Light years A measure of distance, not time.
Media Though actually plural of medium,
this can safely be used as singular.
Men’s, women’s, children’s The apostrophe should come before
the s, since the words are already
plural.
Mixed metaphors Almost invariably the result of
ignoring the literal meaning of a
sentence because it sounds good. A
lot of ‘good’ writing—Shakespeare’s,
for instance— is full of mixed
metaphors, e.g. ‘take arms against a
sea of troubles’. Some mixed
metaphors can be pretty offensive:
‘This is a virgin territory pregnant
with possibilities’. It’s an editor’s
job to remove such problematic
constructions and clean the language
up.
Nauseous/nauseated Nauseous can be used to describe
something that nauseates one, not to
describe the state of nausea. ‘I am
feeling nauseous’ is as wrong as ‘I am
feeling poisonous’.
Neither ... nor ‘Neither’ has to be followed by ‘nor’;
it cannot be followed by ‘or’.
Non sequiturs A combination of two or more
unrelated statements, often resulting
from the urge to pack in too much
information into one sentence.
Example: ‘A resident of Vasant
Vihar, he was tall, handsome and
drove a red Maruti.’ The three parts of
this sentence have nothing to do with
each other. Non sequiturs can make

otherwise good writing look
ridiculous, and should be avoided at
all costs.
No sooner ... than If a sentence begins with ‘no sooner’,
it has to continue with ‘than’,
otherwise the construction makes no
sense.
Not only ... but If a sentence begins with ‘not only’, it
has to continue with ‘but’ and not
some other conjunction.
On to/onto Avoid using ‘onto’ as one word.
Perspicacity/perspicuity Perspicacity means shrewdness and
applies to people; perspicuity means
easily understood and applies to
things.
Practice/Practise Practice is the noun, practise the verb.
Principal/principle Principle means ‘fundamental’ and is
always a noun. Principal means ‘of
first importance’ and can be used both
as noun and adjective.
Prodigal/prodigious Prodigal means recklessly wasteful.
Prodigious means immense.
Prophecy/prophesy Prophecy is the noun, prophesy the
verb.
Prototype A prototype is the original model on
which all later models and variations
are based. Not any role model can be
referred to as prototype.
Pyrrhic victory Not a hollow victory, but one won at
great cost.
Rack/wrack Wrack is simply an old-fashioned
word for wreck. Often when we use

wrack we mean rack, which is to put
under strain. Thus, the correct
expressions are: ‘a world racked by
political crisis’, ‘nerve-racking’ and
‘to rack one’s brains’.
Riveted/Riveting Not rivetted/rivetting.
Sensual/sensuous Sensuous means being alive to
sensations, specifically not sexual,
which sensual connotes.
Shambles ‘In a shambles’, not ‘in shambles’.
Some time/Sometime One word, except when ‘some’ is
being used as a separate adjective.
Split infinitive Refer to Troublesome Words. Bryson
quotes Partridge: ‘Avoid the split
infinitive wherever possible; bit if it is
the clearest and most natural
construction, use it boldly. The angels
are on our side’.
Stationary/Stationery Stationary means something that is at
a standstill. Stationery is paper, pen,
etc.
Travel up/down Something that is usually not paid
attention to. To travel up is to travel
north; to travel down is to travel
south. So you can travel up from
Delhi to Chandigarh but must
travel down from Mumbai to
Bangalore. This gets confusing with
trains because any train headed
towards Delhi, including those
originating from Jammu or Amritsar,
are Up trains. In such cases it’s safer
to avoid using up/down altogether.

Turbid/turgid Turbid means impenetrable. Turgid
means inflated, grandiloquent.
Venal/venial Venal means corruptible. Venial
means excusable. A venial sin is a
minor one.
Who/whom Whom is used when it is the object of
a preposition (‘to whom it may
concern’) or verb (‘the man whom we
saw last night’). Who is used in all
other cases.
Hyphenated Words/One Word/Two Words
The list of standardized hyphenations/one word/two words is too lengthy to be
included here. Please consult the Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors
whenever in doubt. Most usages of hyphenation will also be found to be
standardized in Penguin India publications. Interpretations of what should be
hyphenated or one word/two words is often somewhat subjective, and often variant
usages are not necessarily incorrect. What is crucial is that these usages be
completely consistent within a particular text.
Penguin India Standardized Spellings
For the following words, more than one correct spelling exists in the English
language. In order to standardize usage, Penguin India has chosen the following
variants for its house style.
acknowledgement not acknowledgment
advisable not adviseable
adviser not advisor

ageing not aging
appendices not appendixes
arguable not argueable
artefact not artifact
by-law not bye-law
centring not centering
connection not connexion
dispatch not despatch
encyclopedia not encyclopaedia
focused not focussed.
grey not gray
gypsy not gipsy
guerrilla not guerilla
inflection not inflexion
inquiry not enquiry
judgement not judgment (but use judgment in legal works)
medieval not mediaeval
movable not moveable (but use moveable in legal works)
normality not normalcy
programme not program (but computer program)
reflection not reflexion
sceptical not skeptical
storey not story

towards not toward
veranda not verandah
Commonly Misspelt Words
The following is a list of commonly misspelt words which editors should be careful
of.
accommodate two c’s and two m’s
anoint only one n
battalion only one l
desiccate one s, two c’s
embarrassment two r’s and two s’s
harass only one r
idiosyncrasy not idiosyncracy
manoeuvre not manouever
millennium two l’s and two n’s
minuscule not miniscule
octogenarian not octagenarian
omelette not ommelette
pavilion only one l
queuing not queueing
restaurateur not restauranteur
sacrilegious not sacreligious

septuagenarian not septagenarian
siege not seige
stratagem not strategem
stupefied not stupified
stupefaction not stupefication
supersede not supercede
vermilion only one l
Accented Words
Words originating in European languages (especially French) appear in Roman
but with the necessary accents in Penguin India publications (e.g. naïve, vis-à-vis,
table d’hôte etc.). Please consult the Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors for
the correct use of accents.
Place Names
The following are the standardized Penguin India spellings of commonly used
place names.
Chandigarh not Chandigar or Chandhigar
Chennai not Madras, except in a reference to a time before the renaming.
Dhaka not Dacca, except in a reference to old British usage.
Ganga not Ganges
Jalandhar not Jullandar, Jullender or Jullandhar.
Kanpur not Cawnpore or Kanpore.
Kochi not Cochin, except in old usage.
Kolkata not Calcutta, except in reference to a time before the renaming.

Mumbai not Bombay, except in a reference to a time before the
renaming, or in a specifically political refusal to abjure the old
name.
Pune not Puna or Poona.
Thiruvananthapuram not Trivandrum, except in old usage